Received: 25 November 2022    Revised: 25 April 2023     Accepted: 8 May 2023

DOI: 10.33012/navi.604



ORIGINAL ARTICLE




Atom Strapdown: Toward Integrated Quantum Inertial
Navigation Systems

Benjamin Tennstedt*1   Ashwin Rajagopalan2                                               Nicolai B. Weddig1      Sven Abend2
Steffen Schön1  Ernst M. Rasel2

1 Institut für Erdmessung, Leibniz

University Hannover, Lower Saxony,                  Abstract
Germany                                             We present an alternative technique for estimating the response of a cold atom
2 Institut für Quantenoptik, Leibniz
                                                    interferometer (CAI). Using data from a conventional inertial measurement
University Hannover, Lower Saxony,
                                                    unit (IMU) and common strapdown terminology, the position of the atom wave
Germany
                                                    packet is tracked in a newly introduced sensor frame, enabling hybridization
Correspondence                                      of both systems in terms of acceleration and angular rate measurements. The
Benjamin Tennstedt
                                                    sensor frame allows for an easier mathematical description of the CAI measure-
Email: tennstedt@ife.uni-hannover.de
                                                    ment and integration into higher-level navigation systems. The dynamic terms
                                                    resulting from the transformation of the IMU frame into the CAI sensor frame
                                                    are evaluated in simulations. The implementation of the method as a prediction
                                                    model in an extended Kalman filter is explained and demonstrated in realis-
                                                    tic simulations, showing improvements of over two orders of magnitude with
                                                    respect to the conventional IMU strapdown solution. Finally, the implications
                                                    of these findings for future hybrid quantum navigation systems are discussed.

                                                    Keywords
                                                    atom interferometry, hybridization, inertial navigation, sensor fusion



                                                1        INTRODUCTION

                                                   Atom interferometry is a highly precise technique for inertial sensing (Kasevich
                                                et al., 1991). By interrogating a free-evolving atom wave packet with a series of laser
                                                pulses, information about accelerations and turn rates can be extracted, allowing
                                                the calculation of a complete navigation solution (position, velocity, and attitude).
                                                Applications of this technique for accelerometers (Barrett et al., 2014), gyroscopes
                                                (Gauguet et al., 2009; Schubert et al., 2021), and complete inertial measurement
                                                units (IMUs) (Gebbe et al., 2021; Gersemann et al., 2020) based on Bose–Einstein
                                                condensates are currently under research. The potential position accuracy reaches
                                                5 m after 1 h of inertial navigation (Jekeli, 2005), which makes atom interferometry
                                                a highly promising technique for navigation in global navigation satellite system
                                                (GNSS)-denied environments.
                                                   Commercial options are already available for static settings, i.e., quantum gra-
                                                vimeters (Vermeulen et al., 2018), and have an accuracy and long-term stability
                                                comparable or even superior to those of other high-end conventional sensors

NAVIGATION, 70(4)                                            Licensed under CC-BY 4.0                          © 2023 Institute of Navigation
                                                                      TENNSTEDT et al.



(Freier et al., 2016). In the case of changing inertial quantities, some challenges
still remain. The atom interferometer itself has a very limited dynamic range when
used alone, and conventional measurement models for the interferometer read-
out are often not suited for highly dynamic trajectories. Thus, in state-of-the-art
techniques, hybridization with other sensors, such as conventional accelerome-
ters, is mandatory in order to produce a navigation solution (Cheiney et al., 2018;
Richardson et al., 2020; Templier et al., 2022; Zahzam et al., 2022).
   In our prior work (Tennstedt & Schön, 2020), a combination of conventional
IMUs and atom interferometers in the frame of an extended Kalman filter (EKF)
was presented. The phase shift of the cold atom interferometer (CAI) is predicted
from the measurement of the conventional IMU, determining the target fringe
of the CAI and effectively solving the fringe ambiguity problem. The CAI mea-
surement is then used to correct the prediction model of the IMU, which enables
the estimation of a number of IMU error quantities, e.g., sensor bias or misalign-
ment, based on the state vector configuration (Tennstedt & Schön, 2021) This
model has been successfully tested with two IMUs of different accuracies, with the
higher-class IMU emulating an atom interferometer (Weddig et al., 2021). With the
bias of the conventional IMU corrected, the position drift of the combined navi-
gation solution was reduced by a factor of 30. In general, the combined solution
benefits from the superior long-term stability of the CAI, as discussed in Tennstedt
et al. (2021). This solution was further evaluated for applications on low Earth orbit
satellites (HosseiniArani et al., 2022), where the electrostatic accelerometer in use
has a lower white noise density than the CAI, but a larger long-term drift.
   However, the models introduced thus far have been developed under the assump-
tion that the atom interferometer is aligned with the body frame of the vehicle.
In addition, the equations are not scalable, which prevents the integration of one
or more atom interferometers in a higher-level navigation system. In this paper, a
suitable coordinate system for the sensor frame is introduced in order to allow an
easier integration in future high-level navigation and multi-sensor systems. First,
a system is developed for a general case with several sensor frames, followed by a
special CAI multi-axis scheme based on differential measurements presented in
Gersemann et al. (2020). This multi-axis scheme is then used for further evaluation
in the scope of this paper.
   The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The measurement principle
of CAIs for inertial sensing is briefly summarized in Section 2. The necessity and
basic idea for hybridization are explained, and two types of hybridization that are
relevant for this paper are described. In Section 3, the mathematical framework for
the phase shift prediction, the atom strapdown scheme, is developed. A comparison
with a second existing hybridization scheme follows in Section 3.2. Performance
studies are carried out in Section 4 based on simulations, where the phase shift is
of particular focus. Based on realistic dynamics derived from measurement cam-
paigns, the single phase shift terms are quantified and visualized in order to gain
insight and derive requirements for future hybrid sensor designs. Furthermore, the
error of the predicted phase shift with respect to the CAI observation is tracked
and discussed. The conclusions of this work are presented in Section 5 with a final
evaluation.


2      ATOM INTERFEROMETRY FOR INERTIAL SENSING

  Atom interferometers use the wave-particle characteristics of an atomic wave
packet to deduce inertial quantities. In a basic Mach–Zehnder-type configuration,
TENNSTEDT et al.



shown in Figure 1, an atomic wave packet is manipulated by a series of three
directed laser pulses in order to split, reverse, and recombine the internal states of
the atoms.
   During the interaction of the atom wave packet with the beam splitter lasers,
the atoms are set in a superposition of two internal energy states, |1, m〉 and
| 2, m  k, where m is the momentum of the wave packet,  is the reduced
Planck constant, and k  4 is the effective laser wave number, which itself is
related to the wavelength λ , e.g., 780 nm for rubidium. The probability that the
atoms are in one of the two states oscillates with a certain Rabi frequency Ωeff and
depends on the time of the laser interaction, the pulse time τ . If the atoms are all
in state 1 at the beginning of the interaction, they will all switch their state after a
certain 2τ pulse into state 2, resembling a mirror pulse. Likewise, if the interaction
lasts for a duration of τ , the probability for a transition is 50% and a state-splitter
pulse can be realized. During each atom–laser interaction, a phase shift between
the two states is accumulated because both states yield different momenta. Under
a number of assumptions such as a symmetric pulse sequence (Antoine & Borde,
2003), it is sufficient to describe the position of the center of mass of the atoms
at the mid-point line between both states, as shown in Figure 1. The phase shift
between the two states then depends on the relative position x of the atoms in
the sensor frame, as well as the effective wave number k of the lasers for each
atom–laser interaction. The main limitation of this method is that the trajectories
of the two atomic states must overlap at the time of the recombination pulse. This
requirement might be violated in the presence of rotations, where a loss of contrast
attributed to an insufficient closing of the wave packet trajectory occurs (Roura
et al., 2014) and a separation phase must be considered.




F IGURE 1 Basic principle of a CAI
Left: Atom interferometry in the Mach–Zehnder configuration. An atomic wave packet is
manipulated by directed laser pulses with a separation time T, allowing inertial quantities to be
extracted from the resulting phase shift. The atom position along the mid-point line (yellow) is
decisive for the resulting phase shift. Right: Scheme of a CAI. After leaving their source, the
atoms a are prepared in a three-dimensional magneto-optical trap (MOT). Afterwards, they are
launched into free propagation, and their states are manipulated by a series of laser pulses. Finally,
the atoms in one of the states are counted by detecting photons that are emitted after additional
manipulation steps. A retroreflection mirror is used in order to allow Raman state transitions
(Kasevich & Chu, 1992) and acts as a spatial phase reference. In this setup, an optomechanical
resonator (OMR) is used to measure the mirror vibrations, i.e., frame accelerations, and to
reconstruct the interferometer phase.
                                                                           TENNSTEDT et al.



  For the introduced three-pulse Mach–Zehnder configuration and under consid-
eration of the midpoint-line theorem, the final phase shift φ (t3 ) at the time t3 of
the last interaction reads as follows:

                        (t3 )  k1 x (t1 )  2k2 x (t2 )  k3 x (t3 )                (1)

  The actual observation after a measurement cycle is the transition probability,
or population, of the atoms. This population p can be assessed by counting the
number of atoms in one of the two states, N1 or N 2 . In turn, the population can
be related back to the phase shift via the following relation:

                                     N1           1
                            p                     (1  cos  )                      (2)
                                 N1  N 2         2

   As a didactic example, the phase shift can now be calculated by the inverse
cosine. To retrieve the inertial effects from the phase shift, additional models are
needed. Assuming a constant acceleration a, a simple motion equation of x = 21 at 2
is sufficient. The quantity of interest can then be computed by applying the model
to Equation (1), plugging the result into Equation (2), and then solving for a. The
final equation for the inertial quantity in this example is then:

                                     1
                              a         arccos (2 p  1)                             (3)
                                    kT 2
if =
   k k= 1   k2 = k3 (static setting) and T is the interrogation time between the laser
pulses, cf., Figure 1.
   The approach of using the inverse cosine shows one major drawback of the CAI.
The phase shift is only defined in the interval of 0     , which is a flank of the
cosine function. For a typical setup with an interrogation time of 10 ms and the
example above, this range corresponds to an acceleration of only approximately
2 mm/s². A vibration of the sensor frame may be larger than this value, which leads
to ambiguity in the CAI measurement.
   This drawback can be circumvented by either compensating for vibrations via a
stabilized platform or using different acceleration sensors to measure the vibration
and to combine the signals via convolution with the CAI response function, cf.,
Cheiney et al. (2018) or Richardson et al. (2020), in order to enable measurements
with the atom interferometer.
   Another way to benefit from the better long-term stability of the CAI is to use
a conventional IMU as the main sensor and to correct any drift errors with the
atom interferometer measurement, e.g. Tennstedt & Schön (2020), while the solu-
tion of the ambiguity problem works in a similar manner. Both techniques will be
explained in the next section.


3      HYBRIDIZATION

  The idea behind hybridization is driven by two objectives. The first objective is to
resolve the fringe ambiguity. This is done by reconstructing the atom interferome-
ter phase with the help of high-rate sensors able to resolve signals that would oth-
erwise exceed the dynamic range of the interferometer. For this step, we propose
the atom strapdown technique as a prediction method that utilizes acceleration
and angular rate measurements from an IMU as input.
  The second objective is to correct the IMU-based prediction model with the
observation of the atom interferometer. To this end, an EKF is applied with the
bias of the accelerometers and gyroscopes as a state augmentation.
TENNSTEDT et al.



  In the following subsections, this formalism is described, compared with another
phase reconstruction method that has been previously applied to experimental
data, and finally implemented in the framework of an EKF.


3.1        Phase Reconstruction with Atom Strapdown

  As clarified in the introduction, the phase shift of an atom interferometer pri-
marily depends on the relative position of the atom wave packet in the sensor
frame. The basic equations of a typical strapdown algorithm that is used to com-
pute the kinematic state of a moving platform from accelerometer and gyro-
scope measurements are adapted in order to estimate the wave packet position
and its velocity.


3.1.1         Sensor Frame Phase Shift Representation

   To allow a more general three-degree-of-freedom formalism, the position vector
pointing to the center of the atom wave packet a in an arbitrary sensor frame s
with index j ∈[ x , y, z] will be denoted as x sjsj,a . For now, it is assumed that each
CAI has only one sensitive direction, defined by its effective wave vector k sj . As
an example, for j = x , cf., Figure 2, the vector may read k sx = [k, 0, 0]T , where k
is the effective wave number introduced above. The phase shift φ sj in the corre-
sponding sensor frame can then be calculated by Equation (1). The origin of the
s-frame is defined in the exact location at which the atom wave packet is released
into free propagation. When the first splitter pulse is applied at t1 = 0, the initial
position in the respective sensor frame is zero, and hence, the phase shift according
to Equation (1) is reduced to two terms:

                        sj  2 k sj  x sjsj,a (t  T )  k sj  x sjsj,a (t  2T )           (4)

where T is the interrogation time between the laser pulses and ⋅ denotes a scalar
product.




F IGURE 2 Position vector x sx     sx
                                      , a pointing to the atom wave packet in the CAI sensor frame sx
The axis sx 1 corresponds to the forward direction. In this case, the forward direction is aligned
with the beam splitter laser field and, thus, the sensitive axis k sx of the sensor, indicated by the
black dotted line. For the other two axes, sx 3 aligned in the downward direction orthogonal to
sx 1 , and sx 2 completes the right-handed system.
                                                                                     TENNSTEDT et al.



     If an IMU is used to estimate the position of the atom wave packets in the sensor
frame, a framework known from inertial navigation can be utilized: the strapdown
algorithm. The differential motion equations for the position x sjsj,a and velocity
v sjsj,a of the respective atom wave packets are as follows:

                              x sjsj,a = v sjsj,a                                              (5)


                                                                     
                              v sjsj,a   fisj, sj  2isj, sj v sjsj,a  g sj                (6)

   Here, fisj, sj are the specific forces, i.e., accelerations, and the term 2Ωisj, sj v sjsj,a
denotes the Coriolis force, as the atoms have a velocity relative to the s-frame.
The gravity vector g sj is considered as well. The rotation rates are expressed in
the skew-symmetric matrix isj, sj  [isj, sj ], where the index i denotes the inertial
frame. The index s j with j ∈[ x , y, z] denotes the corresponding sensor frame, cf.,
Figure 3. As an example, the vector v sx  sx
                                             ,a marks the velocity between the sx frame
origin and the atom wave packet a in the sx frame, expressed in the sx frame.
   Note that the equations are solved in the respective s-frame; hence, the change
in the velocity v sjsj,a of the atom with respect to the s-frame points in the direc-
tion opposite to the acceleration of the s-frame, cf., Equation (6). This does not
account for gravity g sj , which affects the motion of the atom wave packet even
when the s-frame is not accelerated. Gravity can be considered as an external force.
Additional effects, such as centrifugal and Euler accelerations, that depend on the
position x sjsj,a are not considered in this study, as their effects are comparably small
for short interrogation times. For future actual implementations with specified
CAI parameters, such as the initial position of the atoms in the s-frame, the dif-
ferential equation (Equation (6)) can be enhanced accordingly. Furthermore, the
recoil velocity caused by the laser–atom interaction is neglected, as the impact on
the phase shift is small compared with the effect of the accelerations.




F IGURE 3 Sensor frames as defined in the strapdown model
All systems are right-handed. The b-frame is the center of the platform, corresponding to the
frame in which the conventional IMU is placed. Left: General setting. Two sensor frames, sx and
sy, are depicted, with each one sensitive for a single spatial dimension, indicated by a wavy line.
A third frame, sz, may be placed with the sensitive axis aligned along the b3 direction. Right:
Multi-axis scheme. By using a single source and three different laser beam directions aligned with
the axes of the s frame, acceleration measurements on all spatial axes can be realized.
TENNSTEDT et al.



   The differential equations are solved by integration to determine the atom posi-
tions at times t = T and t = 2T and to calculate the phase via Equation (4). Unless
otherwise stated, all parameters are time-dependent.


3.1.2   Consideration of Spatial Displacements Between
Sensors

   The accelerations fibb and turn rates Ωibb are now given in a different system b,
i.e., the body frame with the origin at the center of the IMU. This arrangement
results in a spatial distance to the s-frame in which the quantities must be trans-
formed, i.e., a lever arm x bb, sj , cf., Figure 3. As an example, for a very simplistic and
general design of a three-dimensional atomic sensor system, it can be assumed that
there are three atomic interferometers with frames sx, sy, and sz, each with a sen-
sitive axis in one of the spatial dimensions. The transformations of specific forces
in this case are as follows:

                                                                                             b xb 
               fisj, sj  fisj,b  fbsj, sj  Cbsj fibb  Cbsj ibb (ibb x bb, sj )  Cbsj            (7)
                                                                                             ib b, sj


   The fictitious forces resulting from the transformation are expressed in the cen-
                                                        b x b , which results from angular
trifugal term Ωibb (Ωibb x bb, sj ) and the Euler term Ωib b, sj
accelerations of the frame. The sensor frames and body frame are all connected to
a rigid platform; thus, there is no change in the distance x bb, sj , and no Coriolis term
 Ωibb x bb, sj needs to be considered. This same rigid platform argument allows us to set
the specific force between both frames to zero, fbsj, sj = 0. A rotation Cbsj between the
two systems, resembling sensor misalignment, can be included.
   The transformation of the turn rates is straightforward:


                                    isj, sj  isj,b  bsj, sj  Cbsj ibb                           (8)


  In analogy to the forces, the rigid platform allows no relative rotation Ωbsj, sj
between the sensors and body frame, and thus, bsj, sj  0.


3.1.3        Multi-Axis Model

   It is assumed that all three CAI sensors use a single atomic source, as displayed
in Figure 3, cf., Gersemann et al. (2020); thus, a single sensor frame s is sufficient.
Furthermore, the misalignment between the s and b frames is assumed to be
zero, and hence, Cbs equals I, the identity matrix.
   This multi-axis CAI model has three sensitive axes, which are considered in the
model by their respective k s-vector. For example, for the interferometer sequence
in the x direction, the vector reads k s = [k x , 0, 0]T , with k x as the respective effec-
tive wave number. The coordinate center and the starting position of the atoms in
each direction are identical. Note that in this multi-axis CAI, an initial splitter pulse
is applied immediately before the Mach–Zehnder sequence, which divides the ini-
tial wave packet into two counter-propagating ensembles in order to differentiate
between phase shifts based on linear acceleration and those based on rotation. This
                                        s and will be important in Section 3.3.
approach affects the initial velocity v sa
   According to Equation (4), the phase shift φ s depends on the position x s of the
atoms in the s-frame. We can state the following:
                                                                                            TENNSTEDT et al.



                                     x s  x acc
                                             s  xs  xs
                                                  rot  mix                                             (9)

with the single position terms caused by linear acceleration x accs , rotation x s ,
                                                                                 rot
                                                                            s
and effects of a changing rotation vector during the integration interval x mix now
explained in detail.


Acceleration

  The position of the atoms in the laser frame s, as measured by a conventional
accelerometer in the b-frame, is calculated as follows:


                            t
                     s 
                   x acc    fibs  g s  ibs (ibs x bss )   ibs x bss  dt 2               (10)
                                0



   In the position shift caused by linear accelerations, three terms are involved in
addition to gravity g s : the specific forces fibs measured by the conventional accel-
erometer, the centrifugal term Ωibs (Ωibs x bs
                                            s ) due to the lever arm, and the Euler term
  s  s
Ωib x bs resulting from a change in turn rate.


Rotation

 The atom position shift based on a rotation of the s-frame results from the
Coriolis term alone:

                                             t
                                      s 
                                    x rot   2ibs v ss,a  dt 2                                  (11)
                                                 0



Coning

  The presence of turn rates during the measurement interval leads to a change
in orientation vector of the s-frame, which must be considered. An additional
coning/sculling mixture term appears, cf., Savage (1998), which will subsequently
be labeled with the subscript mix. The position of the atoms in the laser frame is
then as follows:


                      t t            
                s
              x mix      ibs dt   g s  fibs  ibs (ibs x bs   s x s  dt 2 
                                                                     s )                             (12)
                                                                          ib bs 
                        00          


   Note that the same fictitious force terms, namely the centrifugal and Euler terms,
apply as in the linear acceleration case. The difference here is that the whole term
is rotated by the relative change in orientation ibs dt.


Higher-Order Terms

  The wave packet is potentially affected in the presence of gravity gradients or
gravitational waves, which leads to higher-order phase shift terms with respect to
TENNSTEDT et al.



the integration time (Antoine & Borde, 2003; Bongs et al., 2006). For the terres-
trial navigation case considered herein and the often limited dimensions of CAI
vacuum chambers, the interrogation time T is comparably short, typically in the
range of 10–25 ms. Thus, higher-order terms only have a diminishing effect in the
face of terms resulting from rotation and linear acceleration and, consequently, can
be neglected.
   This situation changes drastically in space applications (Trimeche et al., 2019),
where large interrogation times of several seconds are achievable and gravity gra-
dients as well as higher-order terms can no longer be ignored.


3.2       Evaluation of the Atom Strapdown Phase Prediction

   To evaluate the atom strapdown method, this technique is compared with a
second method to extract the interferometer phase: the convolution of accelera-
tion sensor signals with the interferometer sensitivity function. This method is a
common way to hybridize the signals of conventional sensors with the atom inter-
ferometer response and is used by different groups, e.g., Richardson et al. (2020),
Cheiney et al. (2018), and Zahzam et al. (2022). First, this method is briefly sum-
marized. Then, the predicted phase shift of the atom strapdown method and the
convolution are compared based on an experimental data set Richardson et al.
(2020). In that experiment, the acceleration data of the sensor frame are measured
by an optomechanical resonator (OMR) attached to the retroreflection mirror of
the interferometer. This sensor is a mere prototype, and its characteristics are only
briefly stated.


Phase Reconstruction by Convolution

  To reconstruct the atom interferometer response that has been distorted because
of acting ambient ground vibrations, the OMR signal is convolved with the acceler-
ation sensitivity function f (t ) of the atom interferometer, given in Equation (13)
and shown in Figure 4. This convolution is then integrated over the interferometer
duration to calculate the corresponding phase correction value for that particular
atom interferometer shot, as shown in Equation (14):


                   
                1 1  cos( t )
                eff
                                
                               eff                    for         0 < t 
               t  1                               for          < t  T 
                eff
               
      f (t )  
                       
               T  1 1  cos( (t  T ))
                      eff         eff               for         T   < t  T  3
                                                                                             (13)
                           1
               2T  3    t                       for         T  3 < t  2T  3
                          eff


                   
                eff
                                         
                1 1  cos(eff (t  2T ))            for         2T  3 < t  2T  4
               0                                     for         otherwise
               


   Here, Ωeff is the effective Rabi frequency, τ is the laser pulse duration, and T
is the interrogation time:

                                          
                              vib  keff  f (t )avib (t )dt                                (14)
                                          
                                                                           TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 4       Acceleration sensitivity function of the atom interferometer according to
Equation (13)


   The OMR has a sensitivity on the order of 10–5 m/s² for frequencies above 10 Hz;
at lower frequencies, 1/f noise dominates. Therefore, the OMR is capable of sup-
pressing ambient vibrational noise for interferometers with lower integration
times, with a maximum limit of 10 ms for good fringe reconstruction. This lim-
itation arises because interferometers with lower T have a higher corner cut-off
frequency, which is given by 1 / 2T; therefore, higher-frequency vibrations will be
capable of inducing noise to the interferometer. Beyond an interrogation time of
10 ms, the fringe reconstruction performance obtained via the OMR signal declines
because of its poor low-frequency performance.
   The acceleration data were acquired at a rate of 100 kHz throughout the interfer-
ometer duration, which spans TMZ = 0.02003 s. Consequently, for each shot of the
atom interferometer, 2003 acceleration measurement samples are integrated over
the interferometer duration in the strapdown in order to calculate the atom posi-
tion in the sensor frame by using the equations in Section 3.1.3. The positions at the
times of the atom–laser interactions are then used in Equation (4) to compute the
phase shift. The Earth turn rate at the local latitude, 52.38°, is used as input for Ωiss .


Evaluation

  The resulting phase shifts from both methods show good agreement, cf., Figure 5.
However, a relatively constant offset of approximately 0.04% is visible, as well as
occasional spikes of up to 0.186%. The largest difference during the whole experi-
ment with over 17000 CAI shots is approximately 2%.
  One possibility for the deviation lies in the beam splitter pulse durations, which
are not yet considered in the atom strapdown method. The two state splitter pulses
each have a duration of 7.5 µs, while the duration of the mirror pulse is twice as
long, leading to a total of 30 µs. During these pulses, the sensitivity of the interfer-
ometer regarding the inertial quantity changes, following a sinusoidal pattern, cf.,
Equation (13). Because of the 100-kHz accelerometer data rate, approximately 3–5
of the 2003 data points are integrated differently in the two methods.
  Finally, we include some general remarks on the two methods: The convolution
technique uses the sensitivity of the atom interferometer with respect to changes
in the phase shift, which is then further related to the sensitivity to the acceleration
of the sensor frame.
                              TENNSTEDT et al.


            30                                                                                                 0.2
                           Convolution
                           Atom Strapdown
            20
                                                                                                              0.15




                                                                                         Relative error [%]
[rad]
            10

             0                                                                                                 0.1
Predicted




            -10
                                                                                                              0.05
            -20

            -30                                                                                                 0
                  0   10       20      30   40    50      60   70   80    90    100                                  0   10   20   30   40    50      60   70     80   90   100
                                                 Shot #                                                                                      Shot #


                              F IGURE 5 Comparison of the two phase shift calculation methods
                              Left: The two results generally agree very well, and a deviation is hardly visible. Right: The relative
                              error, i.e., the difference between the results of the methods divided by the half-sum of both
                              results, reveals a nearly constant systematic offset of approximately 0.04%, whereas larger spikes
                              occur for some shots. Depicted are the first 100 CAI measurement intervals typical for a data set
                              of 17440 measurements in total.


                                In the atom strapdown method, the position of the atoms is calculated explicitly.
                              However, the phase shift in Equation (1), which uses the atom position as input,
                              originates from the sensitivity of the atom interferometer response. Thus, the con-
                              volution method can be seen as a more specialized and slim way of combining sig-
                              nals of different sensors with the CAI measurement, whereas the atom strapdown
                              method is a more general approach, allowing the consideration of arbitrary target
                              frames.
                                The new method can be further used to include different motion models and
                              dynamics in the differential equation system. Furthermore, different sensors could
                              be utilized to predict the atom position, for example, odometry from car wheels or
                              visual sensors.


                              3.3           Implementation of Phase Prediction in a Hybrid Filter

                                 Thus far, the atom strapdown method has been introduced as a way to predict
                              the phase shift of an atom interferometer in an arbitrary sensor frame. The gen-
                              eral steps for implementing the phase shift prediction in a filter framework (see
                              Figure 6) have been sketched in prior works, e.g., Tennstedt & Schön (2021). Some
                              important aspects are now repeated and explained, including the adaption of the
                              measurement model, as the new dynamic equations need some special care.
                                 It is worth stressing the clear differentiation between the kinematic state of the
                              moving platform calculated in the IMU strapdown, i.e., the position x neb and veloc-
                              ity v neb of the body frame (index b) with respect to the Earth frame (index e) as well
                              as the attitude Cnb in a target navigation frame (superscript n), from the kinematic
                              state of the atom wave packet in the sensor frame (atom strapdown). The param-
                              eters that are used in both systems are the bias of the accelerations ba and angu-
                              lar rate measurements b g . The kinematic state of the wave packet changes with
                              each new measurement cycle; thus, it is not necessary to keep track of these states
                              beyond the corresponding measurement interval. Consequently, the state vector of
                              the filter inherits the kinematic state of the platform with the IMU bias as a state
                              augmentation:

                                                                     x = [x neb , v neb , ba , b g ]T                                                     (15)
                                                                                       TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 6 Integration of the atom strapdown method in a filter and simulation framework
The CAI response (phase shift φ ) is predicted by the conventional IMU data and fused with the
actual CAI observation p in the error state extended Kalman filter (ES-EKF) to estimate the bias
of the IMU sensors.


  With this design decision, the filter innovation, which is based on the atom phase
shift model, can also be used to correct the kinematic state of the platform, due to
coupling with the bias in the system model. The corresponding transition matrix F
over the course of a system time step ∆t is as follows:

                                 I3     I3 t    1 n
                                                   C t 2      03 
                                                 2 b              
                                0         I3      Cnb t      03 
                             F  3                                                               (16)
                                  0        03        I3        03 
                                 3                                
                                0         03        03        I3 
                                 3

  The uncertainties for the accelerometers w a and gyroscopes w g are modeled
as white noise with respective variances σ n2 and random walk processes. The vari-
       2 of the latter is modeled by an integrator with white noise w
ance σ rw                                                             rw ,in as input,
                                                        2
sampled from a Gaussian distribution with variance  rw ,in t. For each individual
axis and sensor, the process reads as follows:

                             wrw (t  t )  wrw (t )  wrw ,in (t )                              (17)

  The processes are combined in the system perturbation vector w = [ w a , w g ]T
and affect the bias of the accelerations and angular rates. Hence, the perturbation
input B matrix reads as follows:

                                           03      03 
                                                       
                                            0       03 
                                        B 3                                                     (18)
                                          I        03 
                                           3           
                                          0        I3 
                                           3

where the covariance matrix is given as follows:

              2I  03   ( a2,n   a2,rw ,in t )I3                    03               
        Qw   a 3                                                                            (19)
              03   g2 I3        03                        ( g ,n   g2,rw ,in t )I3 
                                                                   2
             
TENNSTEDT et al.



  The discrete time process noise matrix with subscript k indicating the time step
t  t  t can then be assembled:

                                      t  t
                              Qk   FBQw BT FT dt                                (20)
                                        t

  The remaining equations follow that of a regular EKF with error states, as
described in Tennstedt et al. (2021). Thus, at the filter step at time step k, the total
state xˆ k is updated with the estimated error state δ xˆ k :

                                     xˆ=
                                       +
                                       k xˆ k− + δ xˆ k+                          (21)
  The superscript − denotes a predicted state, whereas + denotes a filtered state.
At each filter update, the predicted error state is always initialized as zero; hence,
the filtered error state is essentially the difference between the CAI observation pk
and the predicted observation h ( xˆ k− ), weighted by the Kalman gain K k :

                              δ xˆ k+ = K k ⋅ ( pk − h ( xˆ k− ))                 (22)

  The observation model h of the CAI is based on the phase prediction obtained
from the IMU data. The acceleration measurement of the IMU, fibb , must be
adapted in order to include a potential deviation ba , i.e., bias, from the true accel-
eration value fibb :

                                      f=b
                                       ib fibb + ba                              (23)

  The analytical CAI observation equation per axis is the transition probability p:

                                   1
                              p
                                   2
                                     1  cos(0     )                      (24)

where φ0 is the steered laser phase and φ is the phase shift prediction from the
IMU data. Readout contrast and offset of the actual signal are not considered in
the scope of this paper. In fact, only the contrast affects the sensitivity in a real
application.
  The steered phase φ0 is set such that the sum of φ0 and φ equals π2 in order to
maximize the sensitivity with respect to the additional bias-induced phase shift  .
  The derivative of Equation (24) with respect to the accelerometer bias reads as
follows:

                          p              1            
                             |  =    sin (   )                           (25)
                         ba 0       2    2     2       ba

  In the limit of   0, we obtain the following:

                              p    1          1 
                        lim        sin ( )                                    (26)
                        0 ba    2     2 ba    2 ba

  The observation matrix Ha for the acceleration bias is then written as follows:

                             p    1              1
                     Ha          ( k s )T T 2  ( k s )T ibsT 3               (27)
                            ba    2              2

  Only the acceleration and mixed term, cf., Equation (10) and Equation (12),
respectively, are sensitive for an acceleration bias. Because of the skew-symmetric
matrix Ωibs , the second term is non-zero only if the angular rate in the direction of
                                                                                         TENNSTEDT et al.



the respective perpendicular axes is non-zero. This result is in line with the prior
statement that the phase shift on a particular sensitive CAI axis is only affected by
rotations perpendicular to the axis.
  The observation matrix H g for the gyroscope bias follows a similar pattern. The
IMU gyroscope measurement ωibb consists of the true angular rates ω ibb and the
bias b g :

                                             b
                                            ω=  b
                                             ib ωib + b g                                            (28)

     The derivative of Equation (24) with respect to the gyroscope bias is as follows:

                                  p               1             
                                      |           sin (   )                                    (29)
                                 b g 0  = 2    2      2       b g

     As before, the limit of   0 gives the following:

                                     p     1           1 
                               lim         sin ( )                                               (30)
                               0 b g    2     2 b g    2 b g

  The observation matrix H g for the gyroscope bias results in a rather extensive
expression:

            p 1 s T            s )]T 2  1 ( k s )T  s [ x s ]T 2  ( k s )T [ v s ]T 2
    Hg         ( k ) [(ibs x bs                     ib     bs                     sa
           b g 2                          2
                   1                        1                     s )]T 3  1 ( k s )T  s [( s x s )]T 3
                   ( k s )T [fibs ]T 3  ( k s )T [ibs (ibs x bs                     ib    ib bs
                  2                        2                                  2
                   1                       s ])T 3  1 ( k s )T [(  s x s )]T 3
                   ( k s )T ibs (ibs [x bs                         ib bs                             (31)
                   2                                  2

   The first two terms come from the derivative of the centrifugal term with
respect to the gyroscope bias. The term ( k s )T [ v sa  s ×]T 2 resembles the Coriolis term

observed for the atoms in a rotating s-frame. This term scales with the atom veloc-
ity. The fourth term 21 ( k s )T [fibs ×]T 3 results from the partial derivative of the mixed
term, which scales with the linear accelerations. Terms five to seven are produced
by the product rule when differentiating the centrifugal term between the b- and
s-frame. The final Euler term including the angular acceleration Ω              s is not con-
                                                                                ib
sidered for the EKF measurement linearization in the frame of this work because
of the inaccessibility of these values. The angular accelerations can be acquired
by either numerical differentiation of the turn rates or state vector augmentation
when using at least three conventional IMUs. However, the first method is rather
inaccurate because of the differentiation of gyroscope white noise in the signal,
whereas the second method may be evaluated in a future study.
   The complete observation matrix H can now be constructed:

                                            
                                       H  0 0 Ha            Hg                                     (32)

  Thus far, the observation equation and matrices in the s-frame have been stated
for an arbitrary CAI observation on a single sensitive axis as defined by the wave
vector k s . In the six-degree-of-freedom case, there are now two measurements per
spatial axis at a time in order to differentiate between angular rates and linear accel-
erations. In this case, the observation vector reads p = [pxA , p yA , pzA , pxB , p By , pzB ]T ,
where the superscripts A and B refer to anti-parallel propagating wave pack-
ets after the initial separation split. The individual phase shifts are predicted
TENNSTEDT et al.



for each observation independently; thus, for three sensitive CAI axes with two
counter-propagating wave packets, there is a total of six different predicted atom
wave packet states.
  For now, it is assumed that the interferometers on all axes perform measure-
ments at the same time. Thus, the observation matrices are individually computed
according to Equations (27) and (31) with the respective k s and v sa
                                                                   s and are finally

added together to produce a single update step.


4       RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1       Impact of Dynamics on Phase Shift Terms

Setting

   We now consider a hybrid solution between a conventional IMU and the CAI
according to the multi-axis scheme. The previous equations revealed a number of
fictitious force terms when the IMU measurement is transformed from the b-frame
to the sensor frame. To evaluate the impact of different dynamics on the single
phase shift terms, a trajectory with a constant velocity of 1 m/s in the driving direc-
tion s1 as well as one period of a sinusoidal changing yaw rate with an amplitude
of 0.05 rad/s is simulated. With these settings, it is possible to apply an angular rate
and angular acceleration on s3 and an accelerations in the s2 direction and thus
excite all phase shift terms.
   The goal is to determine to which order of magnitude the single terms affect
the phase shift of the interferometer. Afterwards, the effect of the most dominant
terms on the error phase shift in the case of an IMU bias is evaluated depending on
the sensor distance x bss .




Results

   The results in Figure 7 show that in the forward direction, the rotation term is
dominant. Whereas the Euler and centrifugal terms of the acceleration as well as
the mixed term generally scale with the distance between the b- and s-frames, the
largest effect arises from the centrifugal term. In the right direction, the largest
impact results from the lateral accelerations of the trajectory. However, the angu-
lar accelerations are scaled by the lever arm as well, which leads to an increased
Euler term that surpasses even the lateral accelerations in parts of the simulation
when the lever arm is set to 1 m, e.g., at t = 25 s. Regarding the mixed terms, the
effect is generally quite small. In fact, the mixed term resembles the transformation
terms of the linear accelerations, scaled by the integrated angular rates. Thus, for
most terrestrial applications, these terms are smaller than the centrifugal and Euler
terms from the transformation of the linear acceleration alone.
   Next, we focus on the effect of the lever arm on the dynamic terms. In contrast
to the prior example, the error of the predicted phase in the case of a bias in the
accelerations and angular rates is now examined. Instead of a time-dependent tra-
jectory, only a slice of the trajectory with the dynamics at an exact time is given. The
phase error in this situation is evaluated based on the size of the lever arm, where
  s  [,  , 0]T is varied in the interval  ∈[0, 1] m on an equidistant scale.
x bs
   The parameters are set as follows, according to the maximum values that can be
expected for typical maneuvers. A constant angular rate ibs  [0.1, 0.1, 0.5]T rad/s
and acceleration fibs  [3, 4, 5]T m/s 2 represent the dynamic situation. The
                                                                                      TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 7 Impact of the different transformation terms on the CAI phase shift in the
forward (top panels) and right (bottom panels) direction
The figures show the magnitude of the phase shift. A logarithmic scale is chosen to facilitate the
separation of the single dynamic terms, as the mixed terms are comparably small. Similarly, the
y-axis is limited to the range of [10 −5 , 103 ] rad to avoid unfavorable scaling. As expected from the
dynamic equations, the lever arm x bs     s = [, 0, 0]T , where  is the value indicated in the title of

each subfigure, linearly scales the centrifugal (Centri) and Euler parts of both the acceleration
and mixture term.


angular rate and angular acceleration for the mixture Euler term are scaled down
by a factor of 1 / 2 to account for being normally phase-shifted by 90 degrees
with respect to each other, as Figure 7 demonstrates in the right direction for the
example of the Euler and acceleration terms.
   The constant biases of the acceleration and angular rate signals are defined as
 ba  10 4 m/s 2 and bg  3  10 5 rad/s on all axes.
   The interrogation time and wave numbers are T = 25 ms and k x , y, z  4 /780 nm,
respectively. The initial atom velocity v sas = [0, 0.096, 0]T m/s is summed with the
                                   s
integrated linear accelerations fib ⋅ 2T in order to emulate the largest atom velocity to
be expected.
   As shown in Figure 8, the linear acceleration and the rotation in the correspond-
ing direction are naturally independent of the lever arm. The acceleration has a rel-
atively large impact, which is caused by the comparably large accelerometer bias.
The two terms that show the greatest scaling with the magnitude of the lever arm
are the centrifugal and Euler terms. This trend matches the results in Figure 7,
but also shows that even a small distance of 0.4 m in any direction can surpass the
dynamic range defined by the atom interferometer measurement equation.


4.2         Impact of Dynamics on Bias Estimates

   Thus far, the new algorithms have been introduced and the adaption of a hybrid
filter presented. The results have indicated that the spatial displacement x bss
TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 8 Phase shift errors induced by accelerometer and gyroscope bias depending on the
spatial distance between the IMU and CAI
The dotted black line represents the maximum allowed phase shift in order to stay on one flank
of the cosine signal, i.e., the maximum dynamic range of the CAI observation. The magenta line
is the sum of all phase shift terms. The coning terms are combined under Mix Terms because
of their comparably low magnitude. The lever arm range of values represents the value  in
  s  [,  , 0]T .
x bs


between the CAI and the IMU might lead to difficulties for the bias estimate. The
correction of this bias is a crucial step in improving the hybrid navigation solution.
Based on another trajectory derived from a number of different dynamic experi-
ments (Weddig et al., 2022), the effect of the dynamics in the s-frame on the bias
estimate is further investigated.


Setting

   A trajectory that involves most of the maneuvers identified in the analysis of
different data sets collected with IMUs during real-world measurement campaigns
is simulated, cf., Figure 9. After an initial static phase, an accelerated phase follows
with some minor vibrations on all axes. This phase is followed by a sliding right
turn, with only the angular rate changing. Afterwards, a left turn is applied with
accelerations in the b1 and b2 directions, as well as a spike in both signals at
t = 26 s. The trajectory is concluded with another accelerated phase with vibrations
and a small turn rate on the b3 axis.
   The simulated IMU acceleration signal is affected by a discrete white noise pro-
cess with a standard deviation of 5  10 5 m/s 2 . Additionally, a random walk pro-
cess based on integrated white noise with variance 9  10 10 m 2 /s5 is applied in
order to introduce a significant drift of the signal. The gyroscope measurement
consists of the angular rates with additive white noise samples with a standard
deviation of 1.4544  10 5 rad/s and a random walk process with input white noise
sampled from a variance of 4  10 14 rad 2 /s3 . This measurement corresponds to
the performance of a navigation-grade ringlaser gyroscope. The data rate of the
simulated trajectory and the IMU is 200 Hz. The CAI is modeled with a discrete
white noise process with a variance of 1  10 3 a.u. added to the transition proba-
bility. The interrogation time is set to T = 25 ms, corresponding to a filter rate of
t  2T = 50 ms, with no dead or readout times considered. The uncertainty of the
simulated CAI translates to a phase uncertainty of approximately 63 mrad or, in
                                                                               TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 9 Trajectory generated from the measured data showing the accelerations (left)
and rotation rates (right)
The track includes several different maneuvers of 7.5 s length each, including a stationary phase
with oscillations on the different sensor axes, timed accelerations, and turn maneuvers.


conjunction with the interrogation time, an acceleration uncertainty with a stan-
dard deviation of 6.3 10 6 m/s 2 per shot.
   A spatial displacement of x bs  s =[0, 0, 0.1]T m is applied, which was selected

based on the results from the previous section, where the values for fibb and ω ibb
are based on the maximum amplitude of the oscillations and the bias is equal to
the deviation of approximately 2σ for the respective white noise process. This
distance may resemble an IMU placed directly over the atom interferometer frame.
The simulation was processed in 100 different runs, in which all noise processes
were sampled independently. Importantly, this number allows for the intended
qualitative discussion, but is not sufficient for a statistically proven Monte-Carlo
analysis, as twelve independent variables are sampled in total.
   Note that in the trajectory at approximately 26 s, when the large spike in acceler-
ations in the x and y direction occurs, the oscillation amplitude in the acceleration
signal in the z direction also reaches its maximum. At the same time, the ampli-
tude of the angular rates in x and y peaks, while a large turn rate in the z direction
is present as well. According to the experiment in the previous section, it can be
expected that the phase shift error resulting from this situation might be similar
to or even larger than the dynamic range of the atom interferometer and thus pro-
duce an error in the filtered solution.


Results

   The acceleration bias estimates, cf., Figure 10, are able to follow the noise process
quite well, and the effects of the dynamics of the trajectory can hardly be seen. The
increase in uncertainty over time, as reflected in the empirical standard deviation,
is explained by the random walk that was added to the base signals. In the standard
deviation of the gyroscope bias, two distinct peaks can be seen at approximately
26 s and 33–35 s, prominently in the x and y direction. This expected decrease in
performance is also visible in the velocity v neb state, cf., Figure 11. Although the
velocity estimate of the hybrid solution is largely improved during the first 25 s
with a factor of approximately 100 at best, there is a sudden increase in the error at
approximately 26 s. The acceleration spikes in the trajectory scale with the accel-
erometer and gyroscope errors in the mixed term, leading to a comparably large
phase error. At 33 s, a similar case occurs when the magnitude of the trajectory
signals on all axes is at a local maximum.
TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 10 Simulation results for the estimated acceleration and gyro biases
Top panels: Acceleration and gyroscope bias (blue lines, added to the simulated reference
as additive noise signal) and the estimated bias states (red lines) as an example for one of the
simulated instances. Left: The acceleration bias estimate is more noisy in the x and y directions.
This result is due to the fact that the spatial displacement of the IMU is only in the z direction;
hence, the centrifugal term has no effect in this direction. Bottom figures: Empirical standard
deviation between simulated instances for the acceleration bias estimates (left) and gyroscope
bias estimates (right).




F IGURE 11 Results for the estimated velocity
Left: ∆v neb velocity error of the hybrid EKF solution (blue) and the IMU strapdown solution (red),
with respect to the simulated ground truth. Depicted is the magnitude of the three-dimensional
vector of the mean velocity error of the state instances. Right: Empirical standard deviation
between the individual solutions.


  In total, the error of the predicted phase was larger than π /2 in approximately
14% of the CAI measurements. This result does not necessarily imply that the tar-
get fringe is lost and the EKF update fails, as convergence to the true trajectory is
generally still possible in the range of  . Nevertheless, a larger linearization error
occurs when the measurement sensitivities are computed in these cases, leading
to a non-optimal update of the filter despite the fact that the trajectory is resolved
                                                                                  TENNSTEDT et al.




F IGURE 12 Velocity state estimates for a smooth slalom trajectory
Left: ∆v neb velocity error of the hybrid solution (blue) and the IMU strapdown solution (red), with
respect to the simulated ground truth. Depicted is the magnitude of the three-dimensional vector.
Right: Empirical standard deviation between the individual solutions.


by the IMU and the innovation pk − h ( xˆ k− ) in Equation (22) is independent of the
linearization.
   For comparison, the results of a smooth slalom trajectory without any spikes
in the signals are depicted in Figure 12. The CAI-aided EKF solution allows an
improvement of over two orders of magnitude as compared with the IMU strap-
down solution alone.


5       CONCLUSION

  In this paper, the atom strapdown method was introduced and explained, as well
as its application for state prediction in an EKF. This hybridization technique based
on a classical IMU and a CAI has two main qualities: First, it allows the phase shift
of an atom interferometer to be predicted based on data from a conventional IMU.
Equations were developed in a newly introduced sensor frame for the CAI. Second,
this method allows one to combine measurements of an atom interferometer with
conventional IMU measurements, in order to correct for IMU biases.
  A comparison between the strapdown method and the hybridization technique
based on convolution, developed and used in the physics community, shows that
both methods deliver comparable results in the predicted CAI phase shift, while
the atom strapdown method is a more general concept that allows the consid-
eration of different dynamics and sensor systems. The methods were compared
based on a static data set. Further kinematic experiments, including a one-axis CAI
with controlled time-varying accelerations as well as a full six-degree-of-freedom
setup, are currently planned. More detailed CAI models that include the effects of
dynamics and temperature on the atoms will be investigated as well.
  Taking the dynamics from real car trajectories obtained from IMU measure-
ments, our simulations showed that it is possible to produce a valid hybrid solution
of a conventional IMU and a six-axis CAI, as the trajectory states and biases are
reliably estimated. Comparison with an IMU-only solution showed performance
improvements of about two orders of magnitude. In the case of large signal spikes
on several axes at the same time, the solution loses accuracy due to cross-coupling
of different axes and due to a scale effect induced by the transformation from the
b- to s-frame. Methods for identifying those situations on the fly in order to discard
the CAI measurement if necessary will be investigated in future studies.
  In addition, two conclusions for practical implementation can be drawn: First,
the lever arm, especially between the accelerometer and the CAI, should be kept
TENNSTEDT et al.



small. The actual limit is strongly related to the IMU noise characteristics and
the dynamics that are expected in individual applications. The exemplary study
in Section 4.1 revealed that a distance of 40 cm between the two sensors was the
maximum for the dynamic situation considered. Similar assessments could be per-
formed for further applications. The distance is less important for the gyroscope, as
the transformations from the b- to s-frame in Equation (8) show that the angular
rate measurement is not affected by the lever arm. Solutions such as the OMR
prototype applied directly to the retroreflection mirror of the CAI seem to provide
a valid option for future hybrid accelerometer implementations, while at the same
time, a high-precision gyroscope with a larger distance to the CAI could be used.
  Second, the best situations for using a CAI in conjunction with an IMU might
be in navigation tasks in which no spikes in the trajectory signals occur, e.g., in
maneuvers with nearly constant acceleration and turn rates. Even if the EKF can
cope with those situations, the best performance is achieved in smooth maneuvers.
More specific applications must be examined in the future.

acknowledgments
  This research was funded by the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and
Climate Action (BMWK) due to an enactment of the German Bundestag under Grant
50RK1957 (QGyro) and 50NA2106 (QGyro+). The team also acknowledges funding
from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
under Germany’s Excellence Strategy—EXC-2123 QuantumFrontiers—Project-ID
390837967.

conflict of interest
  The authors declare no potential conflict of interests.

references
Antoine, C., & Borde, C. J. (2003). Quantum theory of atomic clocks and gravito-inertial sensors:
  An update. Journal of Optics B: Quantum and Semiclassical Optics, 5(2), 199–207. https://doi.
  org/10.1088/1464-4266/5/2/380
Barrett, B., Gominet, P.-A., Cantin, E., Antoni-Micollier, L., Bertoldi, A., Battelier, B.,
  Bouyer, P., Lautier, J.-M., & Landragin, A. (2014). Mobile and remote inertial sensing with
  atom interferometers. Proc. of the International School of Physics “Enrico Fermi”, 188, 493–555.
  https://doi.org/10.3254/978-1-61499-448-0-493
Bongs, K., Launay, R., & Kasevich, M. (2006). High-order inertial phase shifts for time-domain
  atom interferometers. Applied Physics B, 84(4), 599–602. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-006-
  2397-5
Cheiney, P., Fouché, L., Templier, S., Napolitano, F., Battelier, B., Bouyer, P., & Barrett, B. (2018).
  Navigation-compatible hybrid quantum accelerometer using a Kalman filter. Physical Review
  Applied, 10(3), 034030. https://doi.org/10.1103/physrevapplied.10.034030
Freier, C., Hauth, M., Schkolnik, V., Leykauf, B., Schilling, M., Wziontek, H., Scherneck, H.-G.,
  Müller, J., & Peters, A. (2016). Mobile quantum gravity sensor with unprecedented stability.
  Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 723, 012050. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-
  6596/723/1/012050
Gauguet, A., Canuel, B., Lévèque, T., Chaibi, W., & Landragin, A. (2009). Characterization and
  limits of a cold-atom Sagnac interferometer. Physical Review A, 80(6), 063604. https://doi.
  org/10.1103/physreva.80.063604
Gebbe, M., Siemß, J.-N., Gersemann, M., Müntinga, H., Herrmann, S., Lämmerzahl, C., Ahlers, H.,
  Gaaloul, N., Schubert, C., Hammerer, K., Abend, S., & Rasel, E. M. (2021). Twin-lattice atom
  interferometry. Nature Communications, 12(1), 2544. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-
  22823-8
Gersemann, M., Gebbe, M., Abend, S., Schubert, C., & Rasel, E. M. (2020). Differential
  interferometry using a Bose-Einstein condensate. The European Physical Journal D, 74(10),
  203. https://doi.org/10.1140/epjd/e2020-10417-8
HosseiniArani, A., Tennstedt, B., Schilling, M., Knabe, A., Wu, H., Schön, S., & Müller, J. (2022).
  Kalman-filter based hybridization of classic and cold atom interferometry accelerometers
  for future satellite gravity missions. In International Association of Geodesy Symposia. 1–11.
  Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/1345_2022_172
                                                                                    TENNSTEDT et al.


Jekeli, C. (2005). Navigation error analysis of atom interferometer inertial sensor. NAVIGATION,
  52(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.2161-4296.2005.tb01726.x
Kasevich, M.,Weiss, D. S., Riis, E., Moler, K., Kasapi, S., & Chu, S. (1991). Atomic velocity selection
  using stimulated Raman transitions. Physical Review Letters, 66(18), 2297–2300. https://doi.
  org/10.1103/physrevlett.66.2297
Kasevich, M. A., & Chu, S. (1992). Measurement of the gravitational acceleration of an atom
  with a light-pulse atom interferometer. Applied Physics B, 54, 321–332. https://doi.org/10.1007/
  BF00325375
Richardson, L. L., Rajagopalan, A., Albers, H., Meiners, C., Nath, D., Schubert, C.,
  Tell, D., Wodey, É., Abend, S., Gersemann, M., Ertmer, W., Rasel, E. M., Schlippert, D.,
  Mehmet, M., Kumanchik, L., Colmenero, L., Spannagel, R., Braxmaier, C., & Guzmán, F.
  (2020). Optomechanical resonator-enhanced atom interferometry. Communications Physics,
  3(1), 208. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-020-00473-4
Roura, A., Zeller, W., & Schleich, W. P. (2014). Overcoming loss of contrast in atom interferometry
  due to gravity gradients. New Journal of Physics, 16(12), 123012. https://doi.org/10.1088/1367-
  2630/16/12/123012
Savage, P. G. (1998). Strapdown inertial navigation integration algorithm design part 2: Velocity
  and position algorithms. Journal of Guidance, Control and Dynamics, 21(2), 208–221. https://
  doi.org/10.2514/2.4242
Schubert, C., Abend, S., Gersemann, M., Gebbe, M., Schlippert, D., Berg, P., & Rasel, E. M.
  (2021). Multi-loop atomic Sagnac interferometry. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 16121. https://doi.
  org/10.1038/s41598-021-95334-7
Templier, S., Cheiney, P., d’Armagnac de Castanet, Q., Gouraud, B., Porte, H., Napolitano, F.,
  Bouyer, P., Battelier, B., & Barrett, B. (2022). Tracking the vector acceleration with a hybrid
  quantum accelerometer triad. Science Advances, 8(45), eadd3854. https://doi.org/10.1126/
  sciadv.add3854
Tennstedt, B., & Schön, S. (2020). Dedicated calculation strategy for atom interferometry sensors
  in inertial navigation. Proc. of the 2020 IEEE/ION Position, Location, and Navigation Symposium
  (PLANS), Portland, OR. 755–764. https://doi.org/10.1109/PLANS46316.2020.9110142
Tennstedt, B., & Schön, S. (2021). Integration of atom interferometers and inertial measurement
  units to improve navigation performance. Proc. of the 2021 28th Saint Petersburg International
  Conference on Integrated Navigation Systems (ICINS), Saint Petersburg, Russia. 1–9. https://doi.
  org/10.23919/ICINS43216.2021.9470809
Tennstedt, B., Weddig, N., & Schön, S. (2021). Improved inertial navigation with cold atom
  interferometry. Gyroscopy and Navigation, 12(4), 294–307. https://doi.org/10.1134/
  S207510872104009X
Trimeche, A., Battelier, B., Becker, D., Bertoldi, A., Bouyer, P., Braxmaier, C., Charron, E.,
  Corgier, R., Cornelius, M., Douch, K., Gaaloul, N., Herrmann, S., Müller, J., Rasel, E., Schubert,
  C., Wu, H., & dos Santos, F. P. (2019). Concept study and preliminary design of a cold atom
  interferometer for space gravity gradiometry. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 36(21), 215004.
  https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6382/ab4548
Vermeulen, P., Lemoignc, N., Mcnoret, V., Busquet, C., Dcsruellc, B., Laurier-Gaud, J., Merlet, S.,
  Landragin, A., Cook, A. K., & Bonvalot, S. (2018). Evaluating the performances of an operational
  absolute quantum gravimeter. Proc. of the 2018 Conference on Precision Electromagnetic
  Measurements (CPEM 2018), Paris, France. 1–2. https://doi.org/10.1109/CPEM.2018.8501047
Weddig, N., Tennstedt, B., & Schön, S. (2022). Challenges for a hybrid CAI-based INS due
  to trajectory dynamics derived from real inertial datasets. Proc. of the 2022 DGON Inertial
  Sensors and Systems (ISS), Braunschweig, Germany. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/
  ISS55898.2022.9926311
Weddig, N. B., Tennstedt, B., & Schön, S. (2021). Performance evaluation of a three-dimensional
  cold atom interferometer based inertial navigation system. Proc. of the 2021 DGON Inertial
  Sensors and Systems (ISS), Braunschweig, Germany. 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/
  ISS52949.2021.9619776
Zahzam, N., Christophe, B., Lebat, V., Hardy, E., Huynh, P.-A., Marquet, N., Blanchard, C.,
  Bidel, Y., Bresson, A., Abrykosov, P., Gruber, T., Pail, R., Daras, I., & Carraz, O. (2022). Hybrid
  electrostatic/atomic accelerometer for future space gravity missions. Remote Sensing, 14(14),
  3273. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14143273




   How to cite this article: Tennstedt, B., Rajagopalan, A., Weddig, N.B.,
   Abend, S., Schön, S., & Rasel, E. M. (2023). Atom strapdown: Toward inte-
   grated quantum inertial navigation systems. NAVIGATION, 70(4). https://
   doi.org/10.33012/navi.604
